Updated: 27 October 1999

The following are known problems/deficiencies in the IMAP 4.7 toolkit:
 . Possible problems for some installations:
   . In some versions of Redhat Linux, SVR4-style timezone name lookup
      doesn't work properly due to a bug in glibc.  The workaround is to
      edit os_lnx.c to include tz_bsd.c instead of tz_sv4.c.  Note that
      other versions of Linux don't support BSD-style timezone name
      lookup, so don't make this change unless it's needed on your system.
   . /tmp, /usr/tmp or /var/tmp (if present), and the mail spool directory
      must be protected 1777 (world write with sticky bit); otherwise
      mailbox locking and updates won't work.
   . Multiple access protection locking does not work if the mailbox or
      /tmp are NFS mounted.
   . Shared access mailbox formats (mbx, mtx, mx, and tenex) do not work
      well with NFS and such usage is not supported.  mmdf and unix formats
      are supported for use over NFS; however there won't be any multiple
      access locking protection.
   . Server startup delays may occur if a reverse DNS (IP address to name)
      lookup on the client's IP address does not complete in an expeditious
      fashion.  This is actually a DNS problem and should be fixed in the
      DNS and/or the server's host table.  A workaround exists (see the
      top-level Makefile for details) but is not recommended and can not
      be used at all with Kerberos.
 . Bugs:
   . It doesn't work to have a "}" character as a user name in /user= in a
      mailbox name, even if the user name is quoted.  In other words,
      {blurdybloop.com/user="foo}bar"}zap won't work; foo will be interpreted
      as an unterminated quoted string and the remote mailbox name will be
      bar"}zap.
   . Case-independent searching only works for the 26 Roman alphabetics and
      not for any other characters
   . The experimental mx driver has performance problems and shouldn't be used
   . docs/internal.txt is out of date (again)
 . IMAP client limitations:
   . No SASL protection mechanisms (SASL authentication mechanisms are
      supported)
 . POP client limitations:
   . No SASL protection mechanisms (SASL authentication mechanisms are
      supported)
   . No POP3 UID support
 . NNTP client limitations:
   . No extensions support
   . No SASL support
 . SMTP client limitations:
   . No SASL protection mechanisms (SASL authentication mechanisms are
      supported)
   . No support for use of TURN, ETRN, and pipelining.
   . No support for enhanced status codes
 . UNIX limitations:
   . Supported local file formats: mbx, mh, mmdf, mtx, mx, news, phile, tenex,
      unix
   . Supported SASL mechanisms: CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, ANONYMOUS, GSSAPI
   . Sticky UIDs are not supported in the mh, mtx, and tenex drivers
   . Creation of keywords is not supported in the mh, mtx, and tenex drivers
   . Flat file formats (mbx, mmdf, mtx, phile, tenex, unix) do not permit
      mailboxes to have inferior names
 . Amiga limitations:
   . Supported local file formats: mbx, mh, mmdf, mtx, mx, news, phile, tenex,
      unix
   . Supported SASL mechanisms: CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, ANONYMOUS
   . Sticky UIDs are not supported in the mh, mtx, and tenex drivers
   . Creation of keywords is not supported in the mh, mtx, and tenex drivers
   . Flat file formats (mbx, mmdf, mtx, phile, tenex, unix) do not permit
      mailboxes to have inferior names
 . NT limitations:
   . Supported local file formats: mbx, mtx, tenex, unix
   . Supported SASL mechanisms: CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, ANONYMOUS, GSSAPI
   . Sticky UIDs are not supported in the mtxnt and tenexnt drivers
   . Creation of keywords is not supported in the mtxnt and tenexnt drivers
   . No support for TCP open timeouts
   . Flat file formats (mbx, mtx, tenex, unix) do not permit mailboxes to have
      inferior names
 . DOS limitations:
   . Supported local file formats: bezerk, mtx
   . Supported SASL mechanisms: CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, ANONYMOUS
   . Supported TCPs: B&W, Novell, PC-NFs, PC/TCP, Waterloo, Winsock
   . Sticky UIDs are not supported on local files
   . Creation of keywords are not supported on local files
   . Bezerk driver is read-only and does not handle LF-only newlines well
   . No support for any TCP timeouts on Waterloo DOS
   . No support for TCP open timeouts on Winsock and generic DOS
   . Flat file formats (bezerk, mtx) do not permit mailboxes to have inferior
      names
   . Does not work well unless a mailgets routine is armed when fetching
      texts.
 . Mac limitations:
   . No local file drivers
   . Supported SASL mechanisms: CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, ANONYMOUS
 . TOPS-20 limitations:
   . No local file drivers
   . Supported SASL mechanisms: CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, ANONYMOUS
   . No support for any TCP timeouts
 . VMS limitations:
   . No local file drivers
   . Supported SASL mechanisms: CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, ANONYMOUS
   . Supported TCPs: Multinet, Netlib
   . No support for any TCP timeouts on VMS Netlib
   . No support for TCP open timeouts on VMS Multinet
 . Windows CE limitations:
   . No local file drivers
   . Supported SASL mechanisms: CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, ANONYMOUS
   . No support for TCP open timeouts
   . Not finished, only builds c-client library
 . OS/2 limitations:
   . Not finished, does not build
